feat: add `ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient` (#12216)
stdlib-js/stdlib: lib/node_modules/@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient/README.md

<!--

@license Apache-2.0

Copyright (c) 2026 The Stdlib Authors.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

-->

# hingeGradient

> > Compute the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] between two double-precision floating-point numbers.

Author: ```suggestion
> Compute the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.
```

<section class="intro">

The [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] is defined as

<!-- <equation class="equation" label="eq:hinge_loss_gradient" align="center" raw="\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} = \begin{cases} -yx_i & \text{if } yp < 1 \\ 0 & \text{otherwise} \end{cases}" alt="Equation for the hinge loss gradient."> -->

```math
\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} =
\begin{cases}
-yx_i & \text{if } yp < 1 \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
```

<!-- </equation> -->

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<section class="usage">

## Usage

```javascript
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );
```

#### hingeGradient( x, y, p )

> Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] between two double-precision floating-point numbers.

Author: ```suggestion
Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.
```

// returns NaN
```

</section>

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="examples">

## Examples

<!-- eslint no-undef: "error" -->

```javascript
var uniform = require( '@stdlib/random/array/uniform' );
var sample = require( '@stdlib/random/sample' );
var logEachMap = require( '@stdlib/console/log-each-map' );
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );

var y = sample( [ -1.0, 1.0 ], {
    'size': 100
});
var x = uniform( 100, -100.0, 100.0, {
    'dtype': 'float64'
});
var p = uniform( 100, -5.0, 5.0, {
    'dtype': 'float64'
});

logEachMap( 'hingeGradient(%0.4f, %0.4f, %0.4f) = %0.4f', x, y, p, hingeGradient );

```

</section>

<!-- /.examples -->

<!-- C interface documentation. -->

* * *

<section class="c">

## C APIs

<!-- Section to include introductory text. Make sure to keep an empty line after the intro `section` element and another before the `/section` close. -->

<section class="intro">

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<!-- C usage documentation. -->

<section class="usage">

### Usage

```c
#include "stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge_gradient.h"
```

#### stdlib_base_float64_hinge_gradient( x, y, p )

> Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] between two double-precision floating-point numbers.

Author: ```suggestion
Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.
```

<!-- <equation class="equation" label="eq:hinge_loss_gradient" align="center" raw="\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} = \begin{cases} -yx_i & \text{if } yp <= t \\ 0 & \text{otherwise} \end{cases}" alt="Equation for the hinge loss gradient."> -->

```math
\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} =
\begin{cases}
-yx_i & \text{if } yp <= t \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
```

<!-- </equation> -->

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<section class="usage">

## Usage

```javascript
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );
```

#### hingeGradient( x, t, y, p )

Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.

```javascript
var v = hingeGradient( 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.782 );
// returns -3.0

v = hingeGradient( -1.3, 1.0, 1.0, -0.999 );
// returns 1.3
```

If any argument is `NaN`, the function returns `NaN`.

```javascript
var v = hingeGradient( NaN, 1.0, 1.0, 0.782 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( 1.0, 1.0, NaN, 0.782 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( NaN, NaN, 1.0, 0.782 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( NaN, NaN, NaN, NaN );
// returns NaN
```

If `y` is not +1 or -1, the function returns `NaN`.

> When `t=1.0`, we get the loss used by SVM, where as when `t=0.0`, we get the loss used by the Perceptron.

Reviewer: This line should be moved to a "notes" section.

```javascript
var v = hingeGradient( 3.0, 1.0, -0.9, 1.0 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( 2.4, 1.0, 0.453, 0.76 );
// returns NaN
```

</section>

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="examples">

## Examples

<!-- eslint no-undef: "error" -->

```javascript
var uniform = require( '@stdlib/random/array/uniform' );
var sample = require( '@stdlib/random/sample' );
var logEachMap = require( '@stdlib/console/log-each-map' );
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );

var y = sample( [ -1.0, 1.0 ], {
    'size': 100
});
var x = uniform( 100, -100.0, 100.0, {
    'dtype': 'float64'
});

> var t = uniform( 100, 0.0, 5.0 {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
var t = uniform( 100, 0.0, 5.0, {
```

> var t = uniform( 0.0, 5.0, 100.0, {

Author: ```suggestion
var t = uniform( 100, 0.0, 5.0 {
```

```c
#include "stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge_gradient.h"
#include <stdio.h>

int main( void ) {
    const double x[] = { -10.0, -9.56, -8.67, -7.78, -6.89, 6.89, 7.78, 8.67, 9.56, 10.0 };
    const double t[] = { 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0 };
    const double y[] = { -1.0, -1.0, -1.0, -1.0, -1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0 };
    const double p[] = { -5.0, -3.89, -2.78, -1.67, -0.56, 0.56, 1.67, 2.78, 3.89, 5.0 };

    double v;
    int i;
    for ( i = 0; i < 10; i++ ) {
        v = stdlib_base_float64_hinge_gradient( x[ i ], t[ i ], y[ i ], p[ i ] );
        printf( "hingeGradient(%lf, %lf, %lf, %lf) = %lf\n", x[ i ], t[ i ], y[ i ], p[ i ], v );
    }
}
```

</section>

<!-- /.examples -->

</section>

<!-- /.c -->

<!-- Section for related `stdlib` packages. Do not manually edit this section, as it is automatically populated. -->

<section class="related">

</section>

<!-- /.related -->

<!-- Section for all links. Make sure to keep an empty line after the `section` element and another before the `/section` close. -->

<section class="links">

[hinge-loss-gradient]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hinge_loss#Optimization

<!-- <related-links> -->

> <!-- </related-links> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( NaN, NaN, 1.0, 0.782 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( NaN, NaN, NaN, NaN );
// returns NaN
```

If `y` is not +1 or -1, the function returns `NaN`.

```javascript
var v = hingeGradient( 3.0, 1.0, -0.9, 1.0 );
// returns NaN

v = hingeGradient( 2.4, 1.0, 0.453, 0.76 );
// returns NaN
```

</section>

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="notes">

## Notes

-   When `t = 1.0`, we get the loss used by SVM, where as when `t = 0.0`, we get the loss used by the Perceptron.

</section>

<!-- /.notes -->

<section class="examples">

## Examples

<!-- eslint no-undef: "error" -->

```javascript
var uniform = require( '@stdlib/random/array/uniform' );
var sample = require( '@stdlib/random/sample' );
var logEachMap = require( '@stdlib/console/log-each-map' );
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );

var y = sample( [ -1.0, 1.0 ], {
    'size': 100
});
var opts = {
    'dtype': 'float64'
};
var x = uniform( 100, -100.0, 100.0, opts );
var t = uniform( 100, 0.0, 5.0, opts );
var p = uniform( 100, -5.0, 5.0, opts );

logEachMap( 'hingeGradient(%0.4f, %0.4f, %0.4f, %0.4f) = %0.4f', x, t, y, p, hingeGradient );

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

-->

# hingeGradient

> Compute the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.

<section class="intro">

The [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] is defined as

<!-- <equation class="equation" label="eq:hinge_loss_gradient" align="center" raw="\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} = \begin{cases} -yx_i & \text{if } yp \leq t \\ 0 & \text{otherwise} \end{cases}" alt="Equation for the hinge loss gradient."> -->

```math
\frac{\partial \ell}{\partial w_i} = \begin{cases} -yx_i & \text{if } yp \leq t \\ 0 & \text{otherwise} \end{cases}
```

<!-- </equation> -->

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<section class="usage">

## Usage

```javascript
var hingeGradient = require( '@stdlib/ml/base/loss/float64/hinge-gradient' );
```

#### hingeGradient( x, t, y, p )

Computes the [hinge loss gradient][hinge-loss-gradient] with respect to a model parameter.

```javascript
var v = hingeGradient( 3.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.782 );
// returns -3.0

v = hingeGradient( -1.3, 1.0, 1.0, -0.999 );
// returns 1.3
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
